# snplord
Snplord is a Snakemake based pipeline that automates SNP-based phylogenetic analyses using snippy (https://github.com/tseemann/snippy), Gubbins (https://github.com/sanger-pathogens/gubbins), snp-sites (https://github.com/sanger-pathogens/snp-sites) and FastTree2.

This analysis is most suited to comparing closely related haploid genomes for which there is a good quality reference genome available, however contig assemblies may also be used as a reference.

It requires Illumina short read pairs with filenames in format name.R1.fastq.gz/name.R2.fastq.gz and reference genome with filename name.fa (NOT .fasta).

## Installation
You will need to install Miniconda3 and create an environment 
```
conda create -n snakemake -c bioconda snakemake
```
Clone the snplord repository into your home or data directory and enter this directory, this will be your working directory for analysis
```
git clone https://github.com/CJREID/snplord.git
cd snplord
```

## Prepare input files
Next you will need to edit the config file (config_files/snake-snipppy.config.yaml) so snplord knows where to look for input files. The simplest way to do this is to put all your reads in one folder with no subdirectories and add this path to the config file. Put the reference genome in the ref folder or add the path to the enclosing folder to the config file 'ref:' The reference genome must be in fasta format with suffix .fa (NOT .fasta)

## Running snplord
Return to the snplord directory and activate your snakemake environment
```
source activate snakemake
```
Check the workflow that snakemake intends to run
```
snakemake -np 
```
If you have no errors then run
```
snakemake -p --use-conda --resource mem_mb=64000
```

If you are running on ARClab use `nohup` to run the computation in the background and pipe your standard output and error output to appropriately named text files like so:
```
nohup snakemake -p --use-conda --resource mem_mb=64000 >snplord.DDMMYY.out >>snplord.DDMMYY.err &
```
Don't forget the ampersand at the end of the line.

## Output
Output files will be present in five subdirectories of 'data/output'
1. snippyout

   This contains folders for each of your samples aligned to the reference genome.  
2. core

   This contains the outputs from snippy-core including full and core alignments. You may wish to use the 'core.aln' file to generate a    tree, however this workflow takes the full alignment 'full.core.aln' and runs it through recombination filtering with Gubbins before    identifying SNPs and inferring the tree.  
3. gubbins

   This folder contains all the output of the Gubbins analysis.  
4. snp-sites

   This folder contains the output from snp-sites run on the alignment generated by Gubbins.  
5. snp-dists

   This folder contains a .csv file containing pairwise SNP comparisons between all the samples based on the core defined by snippy and gubbins.
6. fasttree

   This folder contains the final recombination filtered SNP tree.  
   
## Acknowledgments
I'd like to thank Max Cummins (github.com/maxlcummins) for his help with creating this pipeline. I'd also like to acknowledge Torsten Seemann (github.com/tseemann) and the sanger-pathogens group (github.com/sanger-pathogens) for developing programs used in this pipeline.

## Citations
Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. FastTree 2--approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments. PLoS One 2010;5(3):e9490.   

